Text to be classified
A crowd is a large group of people that are gathered or considered together. The term "the crowd" may sometimes refer to the so-called lower orders of people in general (the mob). A crowd may be definable through a common purpose or set of emotions, such as at a political rally, a sports event, or during looting (this is known as a psychological crowd), or may simply be made up of many people going about their business in a busy area.
The term crowd is sometimes defined in contrast to other group nouns for collections of humans or animals, such as aggregation, audience, group, mass, mob, populous, public, rabble and throng. Opinion researcher Vincent Price compares masses and crowds, saying that "Crowds are defined by their shared emotional experiences, but masses are defined by their interpersonal isolation."[1]
In human sociology, the term "mobbed" simply means "extremely crowded", as in a busy mall or shop. In animal behaviour mobbing is a technique where many individuals of one species "gang up" on a larger individual of another species to drive them away. Mobbing behaviour is often seen in birds.
Social aspects
Social aspects are concerned with the formation, management and control of crowds, both from the point of view of individuals and groups. Often crowd control is designed to persuade a crowd to align with a particular view (e.g., political rallies), or to contain groups to prevent damage or mob behaviour. Politically organised crowd control is usually conducted by law enforcement but on some occasions military forces are used for particularly large or dangerous crowds.
Psychological aspects are concerned with the psychology of the crowd as a group and the psychology of those who allow their will and emotions to be informed by the crowd (both discussed more comprehensively under crowd psychology), and other individual responses to crowds, such as claustrophobia, agoraphobia and social anxiety. At a general level, crowd psychology is concerned with the behaviour and thought processes of individual crowd members and the crowd as a whole. Given the prevalence of crowd events, and the potential safety issues associated with such large gatherings of people, the topic is receiving increasing attention from agencies responsible for crowd management and also from governments.
Many studies on crowds have given insights on how crowds respond to different situations. One 2009 report highlighted many observable behaviors of crowds,[2] including evidence that crowds are able to make united decisions regarding their direction and speed of movement, even if only a few of its members have the information required to make such decisions.[2] The degree to which informed members can affect the crowd depends on their position within the group, with those in the crowd's core likely to have a greater influence.[2]
i'm american
excuse me to pass by
iraq one day 
I would like to visit iraq one day
one day
visit iraq one day
i just wanted you to know how great it is to be able to call you friend 
happy birthday to an amazing person that i love so much may you always be happy and healthy
happy birthday
happy birthday to you
poets make more
I make
You make
He makes
I am
you are
he is
she is
we are
they are
well, aren't you clever?
Pretty Woman is a 1990 American romantic comedy film.
Off to Miami!
A slew of movie trailers aired during Super Bowl XLIX on Sunday. Here are all of the biggies, starring all the ‘raptor, race-cars, and reckless teddy bears you could ever want:
As reported, Patriots quarterback Tom Brady makes an appropriately raunchy cameo in the new TV spot for the comedy sequel. When Ted and Tami-Lynn decide they want a baby, they need to find a superstar sperm donor. Who better than one of the most successful QBs of all time? But when Ted and John try to swipe Brady's, um, DNA, their plan goes as well as you might guess. On the plus side, Ted gets to experience one of Brady's perfect spirals first-hand.
Release date: June 26
Jurassic World
The second Jurassic World trailer has a few by-now-familiar elements — dig that shark-bait feeding-frenzy again! — but also features even more glimpses of the movie's dynamic dinos: We see Chris Pratt try to tame a trio of velociraptors ("Eyes on me!" he pleads, though we're guessing he won't have a hard time getting their attention). We also watch a crew of pterodactyls swoop down and grab some poor park-goer. But the big reveal is the new hybrid-dino, the Indominus Rex, which has big teeth, big feet, and a big appetite for lowly park employees.
Release date: June 13
Furious"Looks like the sins of London followed us home," says Dom (Vin Diesel) after he just barely escapes an exploding house in an early scene. The new clip fills in some more of the plot of the high-octane sequel, including just how serious Jason Statham's villain is about delivering vengeance on our beloved crew.
Release date: April 3
Fifty Shades of Grey
Hollywood - stories, pathetic special affects and boring acting - 2015 !
Wiki Loves Monuments: Photograph a monument, help Wikipedia and win!
Page semi-protected
List of languages by number of native speakers
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For various estimates of the total speakers of the top languages, see List of languages by total number of speakers.
It has been suggested that this article be merged into List of languages by total number of speakers. (Discuss) Proposed since August 2015.
Question book-new.svg
This article relies largely or entirely upon a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources. (May 2015)
Current distribution of human language families
Half of the world's population speaks the 13 most populous languages. The following table lists the languages of the world with the largest number of native speakers as estimated by the Swedish Nationalencyklopedin (2007, 2010).
Since the distinction of language and dialect is often arbitrary, some mutually intelligible idioms with separate national standards or self-identification have been unified, including Indonesian and Malay; Croatian, Bosnian, and Serbian; etc., but not Standard Hindi and Urdu.
For a list of languages with the smallest numbers of native speakers, see Lists of endangered languages.
Contents
The following table contains the top 100 languages by estimated number of speakers in the 2007 edition of Nationalencyklopedin. As census methods in different countries vary to a considerable extent, and some countries do not record language in their censuses, any list of languages by native speakers, or total speakers, is based on estimates. Updated estimates from 2010 are also provided.[1]
Hindustani has been divided into the sociolinguistic units of Hindi and Urdu, while a number of northern Indian languages have been partially merged into "Hindi", reflecting self-identity reported in the Indian census. This Hindi is thus not a language in the linguistic sense.
The top eleven languages have additional figures from the 2010 edition of the Nationalencyklopedin. Numbers above 95 million are rounded off to the nearest 5 million.
Top languages by population per Nationalencyklopedin 2007 (2010) Language 	Native speakers
(millions) 	Fraction of world
Charts and graphs
List of languages by number of native speakers, Packed bubbles.
Internet Entrepreneur Mohamed Nanabhay Joins Global Voices Board
We're very pleased to announce that internet entrepreneur Mohamed Nanabhay has joined the board of Global Voices.
Mohamed, an early contributor to Global Voices, works at the intersection of media, technology and entrepreneurship and brings to the organisation a wealth of knowledge and experience about online news platforms, alternative media channels, audience engagement and online communities.
As the Head of Online at Al Jazeera English, he led the team that produced the award winning coverage of the Arab revolutions in 2011. During his tenure, the Al Jazeera English website saw a colossal increase in traffic, and was recognised by the Online News Association for general excellence in online journalism. In 2006, Mohamed founded the New Media division at Al Jazeera which focused on engaging audiences through social media and emerging media technologies. During this period he pioneered and launched the Al Jazeera's Creative Commons Repository.
As an Internet entrepreneur, Mohamed has been involved with developing online properties since 1995 and is also an angel investor, providing seed funding and mentorship to early stage internet companies. He was named a Creative Commons Pioneer by BusinessWeek, serves on the Board of Directors of the Media Development Investment Fund and is a member of the World Economic Forum’s Global Agenda Council on Informed Societies.
Mohamed received his undergraduate degree in Computer Science and History at the University of the Witwatersrand in Johannesburg, South Africa, where he served as the Vice-President of the Student Union, and a masters degree in International Relations from the University of Cambridge.
“Global Voices is the first stop for anyone who wants to understand the issues affecting different societies from within,” says Mohamed. “As the world becomes increasingly interconnected yet ever more complicated, Global Voices is a refreshing and honest bridge across language and borders, providing news that is contextualised and translated by its global community of contributors. As a one-time contributor to Global Voices and former executive at Al Jazeera, I'm excited to share experiences and ideas with the Global Voices community.”
Global Voices’ nine-member board meets four times per year, and has been an active, engaged and vital part of the GV community since its inception. Our board is composed of our two founders, three community representatives, and four external members.
Global Voices Manifesto
Updated 8 December 2013 10:54 GMT
We believe in free speech: in protecting the right to speak — and the right to listen. We believe in universal access to the tools of speech.
To that end, we seek to enable everyone who wants to speak to have the means to speak — and everyone who wants to hear that speech, the means to listen to it.
Thanks to new tools, speech need no longer be controlled by those who own the means of publishing and distribution, or by governments that would restrict thought and communication. Now, anyone can wield the power of the press. Everyone can tell their stories to the world.
We seek to build bridges across the gulfs that divide people, so as to understand each other more fully. We seek to work together more effectively, and act more powerfully.
We believe in the power of direct connection. The bond between individuals from different worlds is personal, political and powerful. We believe conversation across boundaries is essential to a future that is free, fair, prosperous and sustainable – for all citizens of this planet.
While we continue to work and speak as individuals, we also seek to identify and promote our shared interests and goals. We pledge to respect, assist, teach, learn from, and listen to one other.
We are Global Voices.
We're redesigning the Global Voices website and would like your help figuring out if we are headed in the right direction. We want to hear from all readers, contributors, friends.
Students from the University of Washington's Human Centered Design and Engineering (HCDE) program are using Global Voices as a case study for an extensive usability testing process in three separate groups. Each group has prepared a different survey.
We will be asking some people to look at the current website and others to be looking at designs for a brand new site. If you would like to participate, please enter your name and email below.
We are offering one lucky person the chance to win a Global Voices T-shirt!
Thanks for your support!
The Mediterranean in wartime
Redwing was built by Matthew Warren at Brightlingsea, Essex, and launched on 30 August 1806. She was commissioned in October 1806 under Commander Thomas Ussher, and on 31 January 1807, sailed for the Mediterranean.[4] There she was stationed in the Strait of Gibraltar, and operated in company with Scout and Morgiana to clear the area of enemy vessels. The Commander in Chief, Vice-Admiral Lord Collingwood, in a letter to William Marsden, dated 24 May 1807, praised their effectiveness, noting that "within this Fortnight past they have taken and destroyed Eighteen of the Enemy's Vessels".[5]
One of these may have been the mistico Tiger, which Redwing intercepted as Tiger was sailing from Cadiz to Algeciras. Redwing sent her into Gibraltar.[6]
Numerous captures and actions followed.
On 13 June 1807 Redwing and Scout chased a felucca and the Spanish privateer De Bon Vassallio, which mounted one 24 and two 6-pounder guns, into the mouth of the River Barbate, south of Cadiz. They then sent their boats to board and destroy the privateer. They also captured and destroyed two signal posts.[7]
On 22 September, Redwing and two boats from Excellent captured the merchant ship Paulina, and on 3 October 1807 Redwing took the Twillingen.[8]
On 2 March 1808 Redwing and Confounder captured the American ship Ocean, and on 12 April 1808 Redwing and Minorca captured the American ship Hope.[9]
In early 1808, or so, Redwing captured the Charlotta, Ferrier, master, which had sailed from La Guayra, and sent her into GIbraltar.[10]
On 7 May, she attacked a Spanish convoy of seven gun-boats and armed vessels, and 12 unarmed merchantmen off Cape Trafalgar. In a short but vigorous action she drove four gun-boats ashore and sank them, captured one, and two escaped.[Note 1] Redwing then sank four of the merchantmen and captured seven; one escaped.[4][11][12] Redwing lost one man killed and had three men wounded, one severely. For this action in 1847 the Admiralty awarded the Naval General Service Medal (NGSM) with clasp "Redwing 7 May 1808" to the seven still surviving claimants from the action.
At the end of the month, Redwing engaged in another medal-winning action. She chased a mistico and two feluccas into the Bay of Bolonia (Tarifa). There her quarry took shelter under a shore battery of six 24-pounder guns. Ussher brought Redwing to anchor within point-blank range of the battery, using her broadsides to silence its guns. A cutting-out party under Lieutenant Ferguson then destroyed the mistico and extracted the feluccas. Ussher and Ferguson, with a landing party of 40 men, then captured the battery and spiked its guns. This, and his previous actions, led to Ussher's promotion to post captain.[13] In 1847 the Admiralty awarded the NGSM with clasp "Redwing 31 May 1808" to the five surviving claimants from the action.
Commander Edward Augustus Down then took command of Redwing in August and sailed her to the Mediterranean on 23 September 1808.[3]
On 8 February 1809, the boats of Redwing and the frigate Amphion, under the command of William Hoste, cut out an armed brig and a coaster at Melada in Dalmatia, then part of the Napoleonic Kingdom of Italy.[4][14][15]
On 16 September 1811 Redwing, captured the French 4-gun privateer, Le Victorieux, off Sicily, three days out of Tunis.[4][16]
On 8 May 1812, off Cape St. Vieto, Redwing took a small Neapolitan privateer of one gun.[17]
Command of Redwing passed to Commander Sir John Gordon Sinclair in August 1812[3] and she operated off the south coast of France, taking part in numerous operations:
On 18 March 1813, seamen and marines of Redwing, under the command of Lieutenant Tozer, landed on the French coast and destroyed a coastal battery consisting of four 24-pounder guns, a 6-pounder field-gun, and a 13-inch mortar at Carry-le-Rouet, west of Marseille, before capturing a tartane, anchored nearby.[18]
On 31 March 1813, an attack was made, under the command of Lieutenant Shaw of Volontaire, by the marines of the frigates Volontaire and Undaunted, and the brigs Redwing and Shearwater on a strongpoint at Morgion, near Marseille. The marines landed during the night, and at daybreak captured two batteries. They threw the guns, five 36-pounders in one, and two 24-pounders in the other, into the sea, and destroyed all their ammunition. The boats of the ships then captured eight tartanes and three settees, laden with oil, nuts, hides and firewood, while Redwing provided close protection. Casualties amounted to only one man killed and four wounded, while the French lost four killed, five wounded, and a lieutenant and 16 men of the 62nd Regiment taken prisoner.[18]
On 3 April, Nautilus and Redwing captured the Greek vessel St. Nicolo, and took her into Malta.[19]
On 2 May boats from Redwing, Undaunted, Volontaire, and Repulse again stormed the batteries at Morgion. This action led the Admiralty to issue Redwing a third clasp, marked "2 May Boat Service 1813", to the NGSM for her part in this action.[4]
On 24 May Redwing, Nautilus and Carlotta captured the privateer Columbo.[Note 2]
On 18 August, a landing party made up of men from Redwing, Espoir, and the frigate Undaunted, stormed shore batteries at Cassis, east of Marseille,[4] and captured three pinnaces.[21]
On 14 December 1813, Redwing captured the Boa Fe Nova.[22] This may be the same vessel as the Boa Fé Saltaza, which had been sailing from Rio de Janeiro to Oporto and which Redwing captured and sent into Portsmouth some days later.[23]
The Nore is a sandbank at the mouth of the Thames Estuary, England. It marks the point where the River Thames meets the North Sea, roughly halfway between Havengore Creek in Essex and Warden Point in Kent.
Until 1964 it marked the seaward limit of the Port of London Authority. As the sandbank was a major hazard for shipping coming in and out of London, in 1732 it received the world's first lightship. This became a major landmark, and was used as an assembly point for shipping. Today it is marked by Sea Reach No. 1 Buoy.
The Nore is a hazard to shipping, so in 1732 the world's first lightship was moored over it[1] in an experiment by Robert Hamblin, who patented the idea. The experiment must have proved successful, because by 1819 England had nine lightships.[1] The Nore lightship was run by Trinity House, General Lighthouse Authority for England (and Wales, the Channel Islands and Gibraltar).
The early Nore lightships were small wooden vessels, often Dutch-built galliots.[1] By the end of the 19th century a larger ship with a revolving light had appeared, but after about 1915 the authorities ceased to use a lightship. Sea Reach No. 1 Buoy as of 2006 marks the anchorage-point of the former lightship, about mid-way between Shoeburyness in Essex and the Isle of Sheppey in Kent. This defines the limit of the Thames and the beginning of the North Sea.
From 1899 to 1955, the Royal Navy maintained a Commander-in-Chief, The Nore, a senior officer responsible for protecting the entrance to the port of London, and merchant traffic along the east coast of Britain.
The Royal Navy (RN) is the United Kingdom's principal naval warfare force. Tracing its origins to the 16th century, it is the oldest service and is known as the Senior Service. From the end of the 17th century until well into the 20th century it was the most powerful navy in the world,[2] playing a key part in establishing the British Empire as the dominant world power. Due to this historical prominence, it is usual – even among non-Britons – to refer to it as "The Royal Navy" without qualification.
Following victory in the First World War, the Royal Navy was significantly reduced in size,[3] although at the onset of the Second World War it was still the largest in the world. By the end of the Second World War, the United States Navy had emerged as the world's largest. During the course of the Cold War, the Royal Navy transformed into a primarily anti-submarine force, hunting for Soviet submarines, mostly active in the GIUK gap. Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, its focus has returned to expeditionary operations around the world.[4][5][6]
The navy maintains a fleet of technologically sophisticated ships[7] including a landing platform helicopter, two amphibious transport docks, four ballistic missile submarines (which maintain the UK's nuclear deterrent), seven nuclear fleet submarines, six guided missile destroyers, 13 frigates, 15 mine-countermeasure vessels and 22 patrol vessels. As of 1 August 2015, there are 76 commissioned ships (including submarines) in the Royal Navy, plus 12 commissioned ships of the Royal Fleet Auxiliary (RFA); there are also four Merchant Navy ships available to the RFA under a private finance initiative. The RFA replenishes Royal Navy warships at sea, and augments the Royal Navy's amphibious warfare capabilities through its three Bay-class landing ship vessels. The total displacement of the Royal Navy is approximately 337,000 tonnes (603,000 tonnes including the Royal Fleet Auxiliary and Royal Marines).
The Royal Navy is part of Her Majesty's Naval Service, which also includes the Royal Marines. The professional head of the Naval Service is the First Sea Lord, an admiral and member of the Defence Council of the United Kingdom. The Defence Council delegates management of the Naval Service to the Admiralty Board, chaired by the Secretary of State for Defence. The Royal Navy currently operates three bases in the United Kingdom where commissioned ships are based; Portsmouth, Clyde and Devonport, Plymouth, the last being the largest operational naval base in Western Europe.
Contents
History
Main articles: History of the Royal Navy and Royal Scots Navy
Development of an English navy
c. 900–1500
The strength of the fleets of the Kingdom of England was an important element in the kingdom's power in the 10th century.[8] At one point Aethelred II had an especially large fleet built by a national levy of one ship for every 310 hides of land, but it is uncertain whether this was a standard or exceptional model for raising fleets.[9] During the period of Danish rule in the 11th century, the authorities maintained a standing fleet by taxation, and this continued for a time under the restored English regime of Edward the Confessor (reigned 1042–1066), who frequently commanded fleets in person.[10]
The Battle of Sluys as depicted in Froissart's Chronicles; late 14th century
English naval power seemingly declined as a result of the Norman conquest.[11] Medieval fleets, in England as elsewhere, were almost entirely composed of merchant ships enlisted into naval service in time of war. From time to time a few "king's ships" owned by the monarch were built for specifically warlike purposes; but, unlike some European states, England did not maintain a small permanent core of warships in peacetime. England's naval organisation was haphazard and the mobilisation of fleets when war broke out was slow.[12]
With the Viking era at an end, and conflict with France largely confined to the French lands of the English monarchy, England faced little threat from the sea during the 12th and 13th centuries, but in the 14th century the outbreak of the Hundred Years War dramatically increased the French menace. Early in the war French plans for an invasion of England failed when Edward III of England destroyed the French fleet in the Battle of Sluys in 1340.[13] Major fighting was thereafter confined to French soil and England's naval capabilities sufficed to transport armies and supplies safely to their continental destinations. However, while subsequent French invasion schemes came to nothing, England's naval forces could not prevent frequent raids on the south-coast ports by the French and their Genoese and Castilian allies. Such raids halted finally only with the occupation of northern France by Henry V.[14]
A late 16th century painting of the Spanish Armada in battle with English warships
A standing "Navy Royal", with its own secretariat, dockyards and a permanent core of purpose-built warships, originated in the early 16th century during the reign of Henry VIII.[15] Under Elizabeth I England became involved in a war with Spain, which saw privately owned ships combining with the Royal Navy in highly profitable raids against Spanish commerce and colonies.[16]
In 1588, Philip II of Spain sent the Spanish Armada against England to end English support for Dutch rebels, to stop English corsair activity and to depose the Protestant Elizabeth I and restore Catholicism to England. The Spaniards sailed from Lisbon, planning to escort an invasion force from the Spanish Netherlands but the scheme failed due to poor planning, English harrying, blocking action by the Dutch, and severe storms.[17] A Counter Armada, known as the English Armada, was dispatched to the Iberian coast in 1589, but failed to drive home the advantage England had won upon the dispersal of the Spanish Armada in the previous year.
During the early 17th century, England's relative naval power deteriorated, and there were increasing raids by Barbary corsairs on ships and English coastal communities to capture people as slaves, which the Navy had little success in countering.[18] Charles I undertook a major programme of warship building, creating a small force of powerful ships, but his methods of fund-raising to finance the fleet contributed to the outbreak of the English Civil War.[19] In the wake of this conflict and the abolition of the monarchy, the new Commonwealth of England, isolated and threatened from all sides, dramatically expanded the Navy, which became the most powerful in the world.[20]
The new regime's introduction of Navigation Acts, providing that all merchant shipping to and from England or her colonies should be carried out by English ships, led to war with the Dutch Republic.[21] In the early stages of this First Anglo-Dutch War (1652–1654), the superiority of the large, heavily armed English ships was offset by superior Dutch tactical organisation and the fighting was inconclusive.[22] English tactical improvements resulted in a series of crushing victories in 1653 at Portland, the Gabbard and Scheveningen, bringing peace on favourable terms.[23] This was the first war fought largely, on the English side, by purpose-built, state-owned warships.
The English monarchy was restored in May 1660, and Charles II assumed the throne. One of his first acts was to re-establish the Navy, but from this point on, it ceased to be the personal possession of the reigning monarch, and instead became a national institution – with the title of "The Royal Navy".
As a result of their defeat in the First Anglo-Dutch War, the Dutch had transformed their navy and the Second Anglo-Dutch War (1665–1667) was a closely fought struggle between evenly matched opponents, with an English victory at the Battle of Lowestoft (1665) countered by Dutch triumph in the epic Four Days Battle (1666).[24] In 1667 the restored royal government of Charles II was forced to lay up the fleet in port for lack of money to keep it at sea, while negotiating for peace. Disaster followed, as the Dutch fleet mounted the Raid on the Medway, breaking into Chatham Dockyard and capturing or burning many of the Navy's largest ships at their moorings.[25] In the Third Anglo-Dutch War (1672–1674), Charles II allied with Louis XIV of France against the Dutch, but the combined Anglo-French fleet was fought to a standstill in a series of inconclusive battles, while the French invasion by land was warded off.[26]
The Dutch Raid on the Medway in 1667 during the Second Anglo–Dutch War
During the 1670s and 1680s, the Navy succeeded in permanently ending the threat to English shipping from the Barbary corsairs, inflicting defeats which induced the Barbary states to conclude long-lasting peace treaties.[27] Following the Glorious Revolution of 1688, England joined the European coalition against Louis XIV in the War of the Grand Alliance (1688–1697) in alliance with the Dutch. The allies were defeated at Beachy Head (1690), but victory at Barfleur-La Hogue (1692) was a turning-point marking the end of France's brief pre-eminence at sea and the beginning of an enduring English, later British, supremacy.[28]
In the course of the 17th century, the Navy completed the transition from a semi-amateur Navy Royal fighting in conjunction with private vessels into a fully professional institution, a Royal Navy. Its financial provisions were gradually regularised, it came to rely on dedicated warships only, and it developed a professional officer corps with a defined career structure, superseding an earlier mix of sailors and socially prominent former soldiers.[29]
Development of Britain's navy
HMS Victory, Nelson's flagship at Trafalgar, is still a commissioned Royal Navy ship, although she is now permanently kept in dry-dock
The 1707 Acts of Union, which created the Kingdom of Great Britain in 1707, established the Royal Navy of the newly united kingdom by the merger of the three-ship Royal Scots Navy with the Royal Navy of England. Throughout the 18th and 19th centuries, the Royal Navy was the largest maritime force in the world, but until 1805 combinations of enemies repeatedly matched or exceeded its forces in numbers.[30] Despite this, it was able to maintain an almost uninterrupted ascendancy over its rivals through superiority in financing, tactics, training, organisation, social cohesion, hygiene, dockyard facilities, logistical support and (from the middle of the 18th century) warship design and construction.[31]
During the War of the Spanish Succession (1702–1714), the Navy operated in conjunction with the Dutch against the navies of France and Spain. Naval operations in European waters focused on the acquisition of a Mediterranean base, contributing to a renewal of the long-lasting alliance with Portugal in 1703 and to the capture of Gibraltar (1704) and Minorca (1708) (both of which Britain retained after the war), and on supporting the efforts of Britain's Austrian Habsburg allies to seize control of Spain and its Mediterranean dependencies from the Bourbons. French naval squadrons did considerable damage to English and Dutch commercial convoys during the early years of the war. However, a major victory over France and Spain at the Battle of Vigo Bay (1702), further successes in battle, and the scuttling of the entire French Mediterranean fleet at Toulon in 1707 virtually cleared the Navy's opponents from the seas for the latter part of the war. Naval operations also enabled the conquest of the French colonies in Nova Scotia and Newfoundland.[32] Further conflict with Spain followed in the War of the Quadruple Alliance (1718–1720), in which the Navy helped thwart a Spanish attempt to regain Sicily and Sardinia from Austria and Savoy, defeating a Spanish fleet at Cape Passaro (1718), and in an undeclared war in the 1720s, in which Spain tried to retake Gibraltar and Minorca.
After a period of relative peace, the Navy became engaged in the War of Jenkins' Ear (1739–1748) against Spain, which was dominated by a series of costly and mostly unsuccessful attacks on Spanish ports in the Caribbean. During the Battle of Cartagena de Indias in 1741, the Navy deployed a huge force of over 27,000 men in 135 transports and 50 warships[33] against the Spanish port city of Cartagena in modern-day Colombia. The siege ended in defeat and huge losses for the British navy and army.[34] In 1742 the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies was driven to withdraw from the war in the space of half an hour by the threat of a bombardment of its capital Naples by a small British squadron. The war became subsumed in the wider War of the Austrian Succession (1744–1748), once again pitting Britain against France. Naval fighting in this war, which for the first time included major operations in the Indian Ocean, was largely inconclusive, the most significant event being the failure of an attempted French invasion of England in 1744.[35] The subsequent Seven Years' War (1756–1763) saw the Navy conduct amphibious campaigns leading to the conquest of French Canada, of French colonies in the Caribbean and in West Africa and of small islands off the French coast, while operations in the Indian Ocean contributed to the destruction of French power in India.[36] A new French attempt to invade Britain was thwarted by the extraordinary Battle of Quiberon Bay in 1759, fought in a gale on a dangerous lee shore. Once again the British fleet effectively eliminated the French navy from the war, leading France to abandon major operations.[37] In 1762 the resumption of hostilities with Spain led to the British capture of Havana (along with a Spanish fleet sheltering there) and of Manila.[38]
The Battle of the Saintes (1782). On the right, the French flagship, the Ville de Paris, in action against HMS Barfleur
In the American War of Independence (1775–1783) the Royal Navy readily obliterated the small Continental Navy of frigates fielded by the rebel colonists, but the entry of France, Spain and the Netherlands into the war against Britain produced a combination of opposing forces which deprived the Navy of its position of superiority for the first time since the 1690s, briefly but decisively. The war saw a series of indecisive battles in the Atlantic and Caribbean, in which the Navy failed to achieve the conclusive victories needed to secure the supply lines of British forces in North America and to cut off the colonial rebels from outside support.[39] The most important operation of the war came in 1781 when, in the Battle of the Chesapeake, the British fleet failed to lift the French blockade of Lord Cornwallis's army, resulting in Cornwallis's surrender at Yorktown.[40] Although this disaster effectively concluded the fighting in North America, hostilities continued in the Indian Ocean, where the French were prevented from re-establishing a meaningful foothold in India, and in the Caribbean. British Caribbean victories in the Battle of the Saintes in 1782 and in the relief of Gibraltar later the same year symbolised the restoration of British naval ascendancy, but this came too late to prevent the independence of the Thirteen Colonies.[41]
The Bombardment of Algiers in 1816 to support the ultimatum to release European slaves
Disease, particularly scurvy, caused catastrophic losses in the Royal Navy.[42] The eradication of scurvy from the Royal Navy in the 1790s came about due to the efforts of Gilbert Blane, chairman of the Navy's Sick and Hurt Board, which ordered fresh lemon juice to be given to sailors on ships. Other navies soon adopted this successful solution.[43]
The French Revolutionary Wars (1793–1801) and Napoleonic Wars (1803–1814 and 1815) saw the Royal Navy reach a peak of efficiency, dominating the navies of all Britain's adversaries, which spent most of the war blockaded in port. The Navy achieved an emphatic early victory at the Glorious First of June (1794), and gained a number of smaller victories while supporting abortive French Royalist efforts to regain control of France. In the course of one such operation, the majority of the French Mediterranean fleet was captured or destroyed during a short-lived occupation of Toulon in 1793.[44] The military successes of the French Revolutionary régime brought the Spanish and Dutch navies into the war on the French side, but the losses inflicted on the Dutch at the Battle of Camperdown in 1797 and the surrender of their surviving fleet to a landing force at Den Helder in 1799 effectively eliminated the Dutch navy from the war.[45] The Spithead and Nore mutinies in 1797 incapacitated the Channel and North Sea fleets, leaving Britain potentially exposed to invasion, but were rapidly resolved.[46] The British Mediterranean fleet under Nelson failed to intercept Napoleon Bonaparte's 1798 expedition to invade Egypt, but annihilated the French fleet at the Battle of the Nile, leaving Bonaparte's army isolated.[47] The emergence of a Baltic coalition opposed to Britain led to an attack on Denmark, which lost much of its fleet in the Battle of Copenhagen (1801) and came to terms with Britain.[48]
The Battle of Trafalgar, depicted here in its opening phase
During these years, the Navy also conducted amphibious operations that captured most of the French Caribbean islands and the Dutch colonies at the Cape of Good Hope, Ceylon and in the Dutch East Indies; but, except for Ceylon and Trinidad, these gains were returned following the Peace of Amiens in 1802, which briefly halted the fighting.[49] War resumed in 1803 and Napoleon attempted to assemble a large enough fleet from the French and Spanish squadrons blockaded in various ports to cover an invasion of England. The Navy frustrated these efforts, and following the abandonment of the invasion plan, Nelson defeated the combined Franco-Spanish fleet in the Battle of Trafalgar (1805).[50] This victory marked the culmination of decades of developing British naval dominance, and left the Navy in a position of uncontested hegemony at sea which endured until the early years of the 20th century.
After Trafalgar, large-scale fighting at sea remained limited to the destruction of small, fugitive French squadrons and to amphibious operations which again captured the colonies which had been restored at Amiens, along with France's Indian Ocean base at Mauritius.[51] In 1807 French plans to seize the Danish fleet led to a pre-emptive British attack in the second Battle of Copenhagen, resulting in the surrender of the entire Danish navy.[52] At the time of Trafalgar, over half of the Royal Navy's 120,000 sailors were pressed men.[53] The impressment of British and American sailors from American ships contributed to the outbreak of the War of 1812 (1812–1814) against the United States, in which the naval fighting was largely confined to commerce raiding and single-ship actions.[54] The brief renewal of war after Napoleon's return to power in 1815 did not bring a resumption of naval combat.[55]
Between 1815 and 1914, the Navy saw little serious action, owing to the absence of any opponent strong enough to challenge its dominance. During this period, naval warfare underwent a comprehensive transformation, brought about by steam propulsion, metal ship construction, and explosive munitions. Despite having to completely replace its war fleet, the Navy managed to maintain its overwhelming advantage over all potential rivals.
HMS Warrior, the first iron-hulled, armour-plated warship
Due to British leadership in the Industrial Revolution, the country enjoyed unparalleled shipbuilding capacity and financial resources, which ensured that no rival could take advantage of these revolutionary changes to negate the British advantage in ship numbers. In 1859, the fleet was estimated to number about 1000 in all, including both combat and non-combat vessels.[56] In 1889, Parliament passed the Naval Defence Act, which formally adopted the 'two-power standard', which stipulated that the Royal Navy should maintain a number of battleships at least equal to the combined strength of the next two largest navies.
HMS Dreadnought
The first major action that the Royal Navy saw during this period was the Bombardment of Algiers in 1816 by a joint Anglo-Dutch fleet under Lord Exmouth, to force the Barbary pirate state of Algiers to free Christian slaves and to halt to the practice of enslaving Europeans. During the Greek War of Independence, the combined navies of Britain, France and Russia defeated an Ottoman fleet at the Battle of Navarino in 1827, the last major action between sailing ships. During the same period, the Royal Navy took anti-piracy actions in the South China Sea.[57] Between 1807 and 1865, it maintained a Blockade of Africa to counter the illegal slave trade. It also participated in the Crimean War of 1854–56, as well as numerous military actions throughout Asia and Africa, notably the First and Second Opium Wars with Qing dynasty China. On 27 August 1896, the Royal Navy took part in the Anglo-Zanzibar War, which was the shortest war in history.
The end of the 19th century saw structural changes brought about by the First Sea Lord Jackie Fisher who retired, scrapped, or placed into reserve many of the older vessels, making funds and manpower available for newer ships. He also oversaw the development of HMS Dreadnought, launched in 1905. Its speed and firepower rendered all existing battleships obsolete. The industrial and economic development of Germany had, by this time, overtaken Britain, enabling the Imperial German Navy to attempt to outpace British construction of dreadnoughts. Britain emerged triumphant from the ensuing arms race, in as much as it was able to maintain a substantial numerical advantage over Germany, but for the first time since 1805 another navy now existed with the capacity to challenge the Royal Navy in battle.[58]
Reforms were also gradually introduced in the conditions for enlisted men with the abolition of military flogging in 1879, amongst others.[59]
1914–1945
During the two World Wars, the Royal Navy played a vital role in protecting the flow of food, munitions and raw materials to Britain by defeating the German campaigns of unrestricted submarine warfare in the first and second battles of the Atlantic.
During the First World War, most of the Royal Navy's strength was deployed at home in the Grand Fleet, confronting the German High Seas Fleet across the North Sea. A few inconclusive clashes took place between them, chiefly the Battle of Jutland in 1916. These exposed the deficiencies of a British approach to capital ship design, which prioritised speed and firepower, as against the German emphasis on resilience, as well as the inadequacies of Britain's hastily assembled munitions industry. However, the Germans were repeatedly outmanoeuvred and the British numerical advantage proved insurmountable, leading the High Seas Fleet to abandon any attempt to challenge British dominance.
Elsewhere in the world, the Navy hunted down the handful of German surface raiders at large. During the Dardanelles Campaign against the Ottoman Empire in 1915, it suffered losses (6 obsolete pre-dreadnought battleships)[citation needed] during a failed attempt to break through the system of minefields and shore batteries defending the straits.
Upon entering the First World War, the British immediately established a blockade of Germany. The Navy's Northern Patrol closed off access to the North Sea, while the Dover Patrol closed off access to the English Channel. The Navy also mined the North Sea. As well as closing off the Imperial German Navy's access to the Atlantic, the blockade largely blocked neutral merchant shipping heading to or from Germany. The blockade was maintained eight months after the war had ended to force Germany to sign the Treaty of Versailles.[60]
The most serious menace faced by the Navy came from the attacks on merchant shipping mounted by German U-boats. For much of the war this submarine campaign was restricted by prize rules requiring merchant ships to be warned and evacuated before sinking. In 1915, the Germans renounced these restrictions and began to sink merchant ships on sight, but later returned to the previous rules of engagement to placate neutral opinion. A resumption of unrestricted submarine warfare in 1917 raised the prospect of Britain and its allies being starved into submission. The Navy's response to this new form of warfare had proved inadequate due to its refusal to adopt a convoy system for merchant shipping, despite the demonstrated effectiveness of the technique in protecting troop ships. The belated introduction of convoys sharply reduced losses and brought the U-boat threat under control.
HMS Ark Royal
In the inter-war period, the Royal Navy was stripped of much of its power. The Washington and London Naval Treaties imposed the scrapping of some capital ships and limitations on new construction. In 1932, the Invergordon Mutiny took place over a proposed 25% pay cut, which was eventually reduced to 10%. International tensions increased in the mid-1930s and the Second London Naval Treaty of 1935 failed to halt the development of a naval arms race. By 1938, treaty limits were effectively being ignored. The re-armament of the Royal Navy was well under way by this point; the Royal Navy had begun construction of the still treaty-affected and undergunned new battleships and its first full-sized purpose-built aircraft carriers. In addition to new construction, several existing old battleships (whose gun power offset to a significant extent the weakly armed new battleships), battlecruisers and heavy cruisers were reconstructed, and anti-aircraft weaponry reinforced, while new technologies, such as ASDIC, Huff-Duff and hydrophones, were developed. The Navy had lost control of naval aviation when the Royal Naval Air Service was merged with the Royal Flying Corps to form the Royal Air Force in 1918, but regained control of ship-board aircraft with the return of the Fleet Air Arm to Naval control in 1937. However, the effectiveness of its aircraft lagged far behind its rivals, and around this time the Imperial Japanese Navy and the United States Navy began to surpass the Royal Navy in air power.
British battlecruiser HMS Hood
At the start of Second World War in 1939, the Royal Navy was still the largest in the world, consisting of 15 battleships and battlecruisers with five under construction, seven aircraft carriers, 66 cruisers with 23 more under construction, 184 destroyers with 52 under construction, 45 escort and patrol vessels with nine under construction and one on order, and 60 submarines with nine under construction.[61] During the early phases of the Second World War, the Royal Navy provided critical cover during British evacuations from Dunkirk. At the Battle of Taranto, Admiral Cunningham commanded a fleet that launched the first all-aircraft naval attack in history. Later, Cunningham was determined that as many Allied soldiers as possible should be evacuated after their defeat on Crete. When army generals feared he would lose too many ships, he famously said, "It takes the Navy three years to build a new ship. It will take three hundred years to build a new tradition. The evacuation will continue."[62]
The Royal Navy suffered huge losses in the early stages of the war, including HMS Courageous, HMS Glorious, and HMS Hood in the European Theatre, and HMS Hermes, HMS Repulse and HMS Prince of Wales in the Asian Theatre. Of the 1,418 men on the Hood, only three survived.[63] Over 3,000 people were lost when the converted troopship Lancastria was sunk in June 1940, creating the greatest maritime disaster in Britain's history.[64] There were, however, early successes against enemy surface ships, at the Battle of the River Plate in 1939, and off Norway in 1940. In May 1941, with the sinking of the Bismarck, Germany effectively lost her surface ship capabilities. As well as providing cover in operations, it was also vital in guarding the sea lanes that enabled British forces to fight in remote parts of the world such as North Africa, the Mediterranean and the Far East. Naval supremacy in the Atlantic was vital to the amphibious operations carried out, such as the invasions of Northwest Africa, Sicily, Italy, and Normandy. Royal Navy ships also provided an important role in escorting convoys across the Atlantic and Arctic Oceans, and to other countries on the allied side, protecting them from air, surface and submarine attack. The German battleship Scharnhorst was one capital ship sunk while trying to attack an allied convoy in 1943.
Postwar period and early 21st century
After the Second World War, the decline of the British Empire and the economic hardships in Britain at the time forced the reduction in the size and capability of the Royal Navy. All of the pre-war ships (except for the Town-class light cruisers) were quickly retired and most sold for scrapping over the years 1945–48, and only the best condition ships (the four surviving KG-V class battleships, carriers, cruisers, and some destroyers) were retained and refitted for further service. The increasingly powerful US Navy took on the former role of the Royal Navy as global naval power and police force of the sea. The combination of the threat of the Soviet Union, and Britain's commitments throughout the world, created a new role for the Navy. Governments since the Second World War have had to balance commitments with increasing budgetary pressures, partly due to the increasing cost of weapons systems, what historian Paul Kennedy called the Upward Spiral. These pressures have been exacerbated by bitter inter-service rivalry. A modest new construction program was initiated with some new carriers (Majestic- and Centaur-class light carriers, and Audacious-class large carriers being completed between 1948 through 1958), along with three Tiger-class cruisers (completed 1959–61), the Daring-class destroyers in the 1950s, and finally the County-class guided missile destroyers completed in the 1960s.
HMS Vanguard of the current Vanguard-class ballistic missile submarines
HMS Dreadnought, the Royal Navy's first nuclear submarine, was launched in the 1960s. The navy also received its first nuclear weapons with the introduction of the first of the Resolution-class submarines armed with the Polaris missile. The introduction of Polaris followed the cancellation of the GAM-87 Skybolt missile which had been proposed for use by the Air Force's V bomber force. By the 1990s, the navy became responsible for the maintenance of the UK's entire nuclear arsenal. The financial costs attached to nuclear deterrence became an increasingly significant issue for the navy.
HMS Illustrious, an Invincible-class aircraft carrier
The Navy began plans to replace its fleet of aircraft carriers in the mid-1960s. A plan was drawn up for three large aircraft carriers, each displacing about 60,000 tons; the plan was designated CVA-01. These carriers would be able to operate the latest aircraft that were coming into service, and would keep the Royal Navy's place as a major naval power. The new Labour government that came into power in 1964 was determined to cut defence expenditure as a means to reduce public spending, and in the 1966 Defence White Paper the project was cancelled.[65] The existing carriers (all built during, or just after World War II) were refitted, two (Bulwark and Albion) becoming commando carriers, and three (Victorious, Eagle, and Ark Royal) being rebuilt with modern radars, angled decks, and steam catapults to operate modern jet aircraft[clarification needed]. Starting in 1965 with Centaur, one by one these carriers were decommissioned without replacement, culminating with the 1979 retirement of Ark Royal. By the early 1980s, only Hermes survived and received a refit (just in time for the Falklands War), to operate Sea Harriers. She operated along with three much smaller Invincible-class aircraft carriers, and the fleet was now centred around anti-submarine warfare in the north Atlantic as opposed to its former position with worldwide strike capability. Along with the war era carriers, all of the war built cruisers and destroyers, along with the post-war built Tiger-class cruisers and large County-class guided missile destroyers were either retired or sold by 1984.
One of the most important operations conducted predominantly by the Royal Navy after the Second World War was the 1982 defeat of Argentina in the Falkland Islands War. Despite losing four naval ships and other civilian and RFA ships, the Royal Navy fought and won a war over 8,000 miles (12,000 km) from Great Britain. HMS Conqueror is the only nuclear-powered submarine to have engaged an enemy ship with torpedoes, sinking the cruiser ARA General Belgrano. The war also underlined the importance of aircraft carriers and submarines and exposed the weaknesses of the service's late 20th century dependence on chartered merchant vessels.
HMS Albion, an Albion-class landing platform dock on exercise with the Netherlands Marine Corps in 2008
Before the Falklands War, Defence Secretary John Nott had advocated and initiated a series of cutbacks to the Navy.[66] The Falklands War though, provided a reprieve in Nott-proposed cutbacks, and proved a need for the Royal Navy to regain an expeditionary and littoral capability which, with its resources and structure at the time, would prove difficult. At the beginning of the 1980s, the Royal Navy was a force focused on blue water anti-submarine warfare. Its purpose was to search for and destroy Soviet submarines in the North Atlantic, and to operate the nuclear deterrent submarine force. For a time Hermes was retained, along with all three of the Invincible-class light aircraft carriers. More Sea Harriers were ordered; not just to replace losses, but to also increase the size of the Fleet Air Arm. New and more capable ships were built; notably the Sheffield-class destroyers, the Type 21, Type 22, and Type 23 frigates, and new LPDs of the Albion class, and HMS Ocean, but never in the numbers of the ships that they replaced. As a result, the RN surface fleet continues to reduce in size. A 2013 report found that the current RN was already too small, and that Britain would have to depend on her allies if her territories were attacked.[67]
The Royal Navy also took part in the Gulf War, the Kosovo conflict, the Afghanistan Campaign, and the 2003 Iraq War, the last of which saw RN warships bombard positions in support of the Al Faw Peninsula landings by Royal Marines. In August 2005, the Royal Navy rescued seven Russians stranded in a submarine off the Kamchatka peninsula. The Navy's Scorpio 45 remote-controlled mini-sub freed the Russian submarine from the fishing nets and cables that had held it for three days. The Royal Navy was also involved in an incident involving Somali pirates in November 2008, after the pirates tried to capture a civilian vessel.
Royal Navy today
Personnel
Britannia Royal Naval College
HMS Raleigh at Torpoint, Cornwall, is the basic training facility for newly enlisted personnel. Britannia Royal Naval College is the initial officer training establishment for the navy, located at Dartmouth, Devon. Personnel are divided into a general duties branch, which includes those seamen officers eligible for command, and other branches including the Royal Naval Engineers, medical, and Logistics Officers, the renamed Supply Officer branch. Present day officers and ratings have several different Royal Navy uniforms; some are blue, others are white. Women began to join the Royal Navy in 1917 with the formation of the Women's Royal Naval Service (WRNS), which was disbanded after the end of the First World War in 1919. It was revived in 1939, and the WRNS continued until disbandment in 1993, as a result of the decision to fully integrate women into the structures of the Royal Navy. The only current restriction on women in the RN is that they may not serve in the Royal Marines (they are allowed in the band).
As of 1 January 2015, the Naval Service (Royal Navy and Royal Marines) numbered some 32,880 Regular[68] and 3,040 Maritime Reserve personnel (Royal Naval Reserve and Royal Marines Reserve),[69] giving a combined component strength of 35,920 personnel. In addition to the active elements of the Naval Service (Regular and Maritime Reserve), all ex-Regular personnel remain liable to be recalled for duty in a time of need, this is known as the Regular Reserve. In 2002, there were 26,520 Regular Reserves of the Naval Service, of which 13,720 served in the Royal Fleet Reserve.[70] Publications since April 2013 no-longer report the entire strength of the Regular Reserve, instead they only give a figure for Regular Reserves who serve in the Royal Fleet Reserve.[71] They had a strength of 7,960 personnel in 2013.[71] All personnel figures exclude the University Royal Naval Unit.
Surface fleet
See also: List of active Royal Navy ships
Large fleet units – amphibious and carriers
HMS Ocean, the Royal Navy's dedicated helicopter carrier, during Exercise Cold Response in Norway, 2010
The large fleet units in the Royal Navy consisted of amphibious warfare ships and aircraft carriers, until August 2014, when the last carrier was decommissioned. They generally undertake the role of 'capital ship' or fleet flagship during a task force (i.e., Response Force Task Group). Of the amphibious warfare ships in service, the fleet includes: an amphibious assault ship (HMS Ocean) and two landing platform docks (HMS Albion and HMS Bulwark)—Bulwark being the current flagship of the fleet.[72] While their primary role is to conduct amphibious warfare, they can also participate in humanitarian aid missions as well as other duties tasked to them.
The Royal Fleet Auxiliary possess three amphibious transport docks within its operational fleet. These are known as the Bay-class landing ships, of which four were introduced in 2006–2007, but one was sold to the Royal Australian Navy in 2011.[73] In November 2006, the First Sea Lord Admiral Sir Jonathon Band said, "These ships represent a major uplift in the Royal Navy's war fighting capability."[74]
HMS Queen Elizabeth, the lead Queen Elizabeth-class supercarrier.
HMS Illustrious was the sole remaining aircraft carrier in service with the Royal Navy. Following the disputed[75] retirement of the Harrier GR9 aircraft in 2010, Illustrious had been serving as an amphibious assault ship while Ocean was in refit. Illustrious was decommissioned on 28 August 2014, after Ocean had returned to active duty.[76] However, two much larger Queen Elizabeth-class aircraft carriers are under construction. These carriers are expected to cost £6 billion (double the original estimate),[77] displace 70,600 tonnes and commence flight trials in 2018. Both are intended to operate the STOVL variant of the F-35 Lightning II. While it had been speculated that one of the ships may be placed in "extended readiness" or sold with "cooperation with a close ally to provide continuous carrier-strike capability",[78] Prime Minister David Cameron stated at the 2014 NATO summit in Wales that both carriers would enter operational service.[79]
Major surface combatants – destroyers and frigates
The escort fleet, in the form of guided missile destroyers and frigates, is the traditional workhorse of the Navy.[80] As of January 2014 there are six Type 45 destroyers and 13 Type 23 frigates in active service. Among their primary roles is to provide escort for the larger capital ships—protecting them from air, surface and subsurface threats. Other duties include undertaking the Royal Navy's standing deployments across the globe, which often consists of: counter-narcotics, anti-piracy missions and providing humanitarian aid.
HMS Duncan, the last Type 45 guided missile destroyer
All six Type 45 destroyers have been built and are in commission, with HMS Duncan being the last and final Type 45 entering service in September 2013.[81] The new Type 45 destroyers replaced the older Type 42 destroyers. The Type 45 is primarily designed for anti-aircraft and anti-missile warfare and the Royal Navy describe the destroyers mission as "to shield the Fleet from air attack".[82] They are equipped with the PAAMS (also known as Sea Viper) integrated anti-aircraft warfare system which incorporates the sophisticated SAMPSON and S1850M long range radars and the Aster 15 and 30 missiles.[83]
Initially, 16 Type 23 frigates were delivered to the Royal Navy, with the final vessel, HMS St Albans, commissioned in June 2002. However, the 2004 review of defence spending (Delivering Security in a Changing World) announced that three frigates of the fleet of sixteen would be paid off as part of a continuous cost-cutting strategy, and these were subsequently sold to the Chilean Navy.[84] The 2010 Strategic Defence and Security Review announced that the remaining 13 Type 23 frigates would eventually be replaced by the Global Combat Ship.[85]
Mine countermeasure, patrol and survey vessels
At the beginning of the 1990s, the Royal Navy had two classes of offshore patrol vessel, the Island-class, and the larger Castle-class. However, in 1997, a decision was taken to replace them; this decision came in the form of three much larger offshore patrol vessels, the River-class. Unusually, the three River-class ships were owned by Vosper Thorneycroft, and leased to the Royal Navy until 2013. This relationship was defined by a ground-breaking contractor logistic support contract which contracts the ships' availability to the RN, including technical and stores support. A modified River-class vessel, HMS Clyde, was commissioned in July 2007 and became the Falkland Islands guard-ship. In November 2013, it was announced that to sustain the shipbuilding base, three new ocean-going patrol vessels with Merlin-capable flightdecks are to be delivered from 2017. It is yet to be decided if these will be replacing the three River-class patrol vessels or if they will be in addition to them.[86] In October 2014, the Ministry of Defence announced the names of these ships to be HMS Forth, HMS Medway and HMS Trent.[87]
HMS Protector, a Royal Navy Antarctic patrol ship
The Royal Navy's largest patrol ship is HMS Protector. Protector is a dedicated Antarctic patrol ship that fulfils the nations mandate to provide support to the British Antarctic Survey (BAS).
Mine countermeasure vessels in service with the Royal Navy include: seven Sandown-class minehunter and eight Hunt-class mine countermeasure vessels. The Hunt-class combine the separate roles of the traditional minesweeper and the active minehunter in one hull. If required, the Sandown and Hunt-class vessels can take on the role of offshore patrol vessels. HMS Scott is an ocean survey vessel and at 13,500 tonnes is one of the largest ships in the Navy. The other survey vessels of the Royal Navy are the two multi-role ships of the Echo-class, which came into service in 2002 and 2003, and HMS Gleaner, which at just over 20 tonnes is the smallest commissioned vessel in the Navy.
Submarine Service
Main article: Royal Navy Submarine Service
HMS Astute, the first Astute-class nuclear submarine
The Submarine Service is the submarine based element of the Royal Navy. It is sometimes referred to as the "Silent Service",[88] as the submarines are generally required to operate undetected. The service was founded in 1901. The service made history in 1982 when, during the Falklands War, HMS Conqueror became the first nuclear-powered submarine to sink a surface ship, the ARA General Belgrano. Today, the Submarine Service consists of ballistic missile submarines (SSBN) and fleet submarines (SSN). All of the Royal Navy's submarines are nuclear-powered.
Of ballistic missile submarines, the Royal Navy operates the four Vanguard-class, each displacing nearly 16,000 tonnes and equipped with Trident II missiles (armed with nuclear weapons) and heavyweight Spearfish torpedoes. In December 2006, the Government published recommendations for a new class of four ballistic missile submarines to replace the current Vanguard-class, starting 2024. This proposed new class would mean that the United Kingdom would maintain a nuclear ballistic missile submarine fleet and the ability to launch nuclear weapons.[89]
Six fleet submarines are presently in service, with four Trafalgar-class and two Astute-class making up the total. The Trafalgar-class displace little over 5,300 tonnes when submerged and are armed with Tomahawk land-attack missiles and Spearfish torpedoes. The Astute-class at 7,400 tonnes[90] are much larger and carry a larger number of Tomahawk missiles and Spearfish torpedoes. Five more Astute-class fleet submarines are expected to be commissioned and will eventually replace the remaining Trafalgar-class boats. HMS Ambush was the latest Astute-class boat to be commissioned.[91]
In the 2010 Strategic Defence and Security Review, the UK Government reaffirmed its intention to procure seven Astute-class submarines.[92]
Fleet Air Arm
Main article: Fleet Air Arm
The F-35B will be operated from the Queen Elizabeth-class aircraft carriers
The Fleet Air Arm (FAA) is the branch of the Royal Navy responsible for the operation of naval aircraft, it can trace its roots back to 1912 and the formation of the Royal Flying Corps. The Fleet Air Arm currently operates helicopters: the AgustaWestland Merlin, the AgustaWestland Wildcat, the Westland Sea King and the Westland Lynx Maritime Helicopters. The primary role of these helicopters is to conduct anti-submarine and anti-surface warfare as well as reconnaissance, medium-lift, troop-transport and airborne early warning and control missions.[citation needed] Pilots designated for rotary wing service train at the Defence Helicopter Flying School at RAF Shawbury.
With the retirement of the Joint Force Harrier and the Harrier GR7/GR9 strike aircraft in 2010, the FAA has no fixed-wing aircraft in front-line operations.There is an intention to operate the Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II B version with the Royal Air Force. 809 NAS is hoped to be the first FAA Squadron to operate that aircraft.[93] The F-35B will be operated from the Navy's new Queen Elizabeth-class aircraft carriers starting 2018 for initial flight training. For information regarding the types of aircraft operated by the Fleet Air Arm, see List of active United Kingdom military aircraft.
Royal Marines
Main article: Royal Marines
Royal Marines in Sangin, 2010
The Royal Marines are an amphibious, specialised light infantry force of commandos, capable of deploying at short notice in support of Her Majesty's Government's military and diplomatic objectives overseas.[94] The Royal Marines are organised into a highly mobile light infantry brigade (3 Commando Brigade) and a number of separate units, including 1 Assault Group Royal Marines, 43 Commando Fleet Protection Group Royal Marines and a company strength commitment to the Special Forces Support Group. The Corps operates in all environments and climates, though particular expertise and training is spent on amphibious warfare, Arctic warfare, mountain warfare, expeditionary warfare and commitment to the UK's Rapid Reaction Force.
The Royal Marines have seen action in a number of wars, often fighting beside the British Army; including in the Seven Years' War, the Napoleonic Wars, the Crimean War, World War I and World War II. In recent times, the Corps has been deployed in expeditionary warfare roles, such as the Falklands War, the Gulf War, the Bosnian War, the Kosovo War, the Sierra Leone Civil War, the Iraq War and the War in Afghanistan. The Royal Marines have international ties with allied marine forces, particularly the United States Marine Corps[95] and the Netherlands Marine Corps/Korps Mariniers.[96]
Current role
The current role of the Royal Navy is to protect British interests at home and abroad, executing the foreign and defence policies of Her Majesty's Government through the exercise of military effect, diplomatic activities and other activities in support of these objectives. The Royal Navy is also a key element of the British contribution to NATO, with a number of assets allocated to NATO tasks at any time.[97] These objectives are delivered via a number of core capabilities:[98]
Maintenance of the UK Nuclear Deterrent through a policy of Continuous at Sea Deterrence.
Provision of two medium scale maritime task groups with the Fleet Air Arm.
Delivery of the UK Commando force.
Contribution of assets to the Joint Helicopter Command.
Maintenance of standing patrol commitments.
Provision of mine counter measures capability to United Kingdom and allied commitments.
Provision of hydrographic and meteorological services deployable worldwide.
Protection of Britain and EU's Exclusive Economic Zone.
Bachelor Ben Higgins Is Engaged to Lauren Bushnell!
Sharing Options
subscribe now
genetic engineering
The Bachelor EXCLUSIVE! Bachelor Ben Higgins opens up about why fiancée Lauren Bushnell "was always the one" and the decision he regrets the most. Subscribe now for all their wedding plan details plus exclusive photos, only in PEOPLE!
America's most eligible Bachelor is officially off the market!
Ben Higgins proposed to flight attendant Lauren Bushnell with a 4.25 carat Neil Lane ring on the show's finale Monday night. 
Despite rarely being seen together, Bella Cruise says she’s close with her movie star parents, Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman.
“Of course [we talk], they’re my parents,” Bella told New Idea of their relationship, adding that anyone who believes estrangement rumors is “full of s–t.”
Tom and Nicole adopted Bella in 1993 and ended their 10-year marriage in 2001. At the time, Bella and their son Connor (whom the pair adopted in 1995) opted to live with their father. Nicole eventually left the Church of Scientology and married Keith Urban, while Tom married Katie Holmes (the couple divorced in 2012).
Last September, Bella, 23, secretly tied the knot with Max Parker, 29, and has been quietly living in London.
When asked if they’ve distanced themselves from that glamorous life, Parker weighed in with, “Yeah, you could say that. It’s more [of a] weird [situation] for everyone else.”
While the couple have only been married for six months, they’re already planning to expand their family.
“I’m 23, so we’ll see [when the time is right to start a family],” Bella said. “I’m still a baby myself!”
Harrison Ford having dinner with a male friend Friday night at Tamarind ​in ​ Tribeca. “They were in a booth eating Indian food with their hands, and were sitting very close in deep conversation,” 
As Dion, 47, took the stage, Gomez captured a handful of moments on Snapchat via Instagram. After the show wrapped, the “Hands to Myself” crooner greeted the Canadian legend backstage and posed for a few photos.
Dion returned to her Las Vegas residency late last month following the death of husband René Angélil, who lost his battle with throat cancer in January. The legendary singer dedicated her return to the stage in his memory.
“René is the only man that I have known all my life,” she shared during her first performance back. “He always made me feel that we were on our first date, isn’t that amazing? Never talking bluntly, and always impressing himself in a soft and gentle way. We were one.”
Unless you know the right techniques, certain cleaning tasks can take a long time, or get very messy. For instance, instead of dusting ceiling fans and having the accumulated dust fall all over you, just grab a spare pillow case and wrap it around each fan blade. Proceed to wipe the blades clean using the inside of the pillow case;  they’ll come out good as new. Read on for other insanely clever cleaning tricks. 
Do you suffer from "Dim Flashlight" disorder?
You know, that exasperating feeling when you turn on an old flashlight, only to discover it's foggy bulb can barely light the way to the bathroom, let alone down a dark hallway or country road in an emergency.
The truth is, most people underestimate the importance of owning a great flashlight for their home, car or boat.
Ask any fireman, police officer, military man, survivalist or hunter and they'll tell you how critical it is for them to have a flashlight at their disposal at all times. And for them, not just any flashlight will do. Those clunky plastic halogen flashlights that require C or D batteries are practically worthless -- they're just too heavy, too dim, and too easily broken.
Thankfully, recent advancements in lighting technology have taken flashlights to the next level. Compact LEDs have led to smaller flashlights that put out more light while using a fraction of the energy their old-fashioned counterparts use. But before you run out to Home Depot to buy any old LED flashlight, you need to know about a new tactical flashlight called the G700, which uses recently released military technology now available to the public.
Made out of nearly indestructible Machined Aircraft Aluminim, the G700 runs on 3 AAA batteries and is able to light the way to safety with 700 blinding lumens of light. It also houses a super cool ZOOM feature (demonstrated in the photo above), an "SOS mode" to signal for help, as well as a "strobe mode" that produces a pulsating frequency to disorient a threat within milliseconds!
One well known Navy Seal says it's the #1 Tool everyone should own as it could be a lifesaver during a natural disaster --literally!
Massive orders are coming in from Police Departments, Fire Departments, and Armed Forces, and the National Gun Owners Association just announced a whopping 75% discount on G700's for new customers (including the general public) while supplies last.
Don't miss out on this rare opportunity!
There are a few things we literally cannot live without. Oxygen is one. Another is food and water. And then there is sleep: forcibly keep an animal awake for long enough and you will kill it. The same almost certainly applies to humans.
This fact alone tells us that sleep must be doing something pretty important. But despite decades of intense scientific study there still is no consensus on exactly what that something is.
Researchers have found that sleep is beneficial to humans in many ways: it helps us process memories, and keeps our social and emotional lives on track. Yet we still do not really know how, why or even exactly when sleep evolved.
A sleeping animal is significantly more likely to be caught and eaten than a waking animal 
“The cost of losing consciousness to survival is astronomical,” says Matthew Walker at the University of California in Berkeley. Whatever functions sleep performs, they must be so fundamentally important that they far outweigh the obvious vulnerability associated with being asleep.
This means we can confidently reject one of the simplest theories of sleep: that we drift off simply because we have nothing better to do.
This could be described as the indolence theory of sleep. Once an animal has eaten, seen off any rivals and exhausted any potential mating opportunities, it effectively has an empty schedule. With no urgent business to attend to, losing consciousness kills time for a few hours.
It is a fun idea, but considering that a sleeping animal is significantly more likely to be caught and eaten than a waking animal, this hypothesis makes “zero sense”, says Walker.
We might as well cross another theory of sleep off the list, too.
Some researchers have suggested that sleep is a good way to save valuable energy, given that mammalian core body temperatures often drop during some stages of sleep.
Does a housefly sleep? How about an earthworm? 
However, Walker and many other sleep researchers are not convinced. Crunching the numbers makes it clear that sleep does not serve this purpose.
“The amount of energy humans save by falling asleep, versus simply lying on the couch, is about what you find in a slice of brown bread,” he says. “Losing consciousness just isn’t worth saving 120 calories.”
But what is sleep for, if these ideas are out? Before we can really think about answering that question, it would be helpful to address something more fundamental: who sleeps?
We have no problem recognising that humans sleep. Most people can tell that pet cats and dogs sleep too.
But we might feel less confident about identifying when, or even if, a pet goldfish sleeps. And when it comes to smaller or more distantly related animals we would be even less sure. Does a housefly sleep? How about an earthworm?
Sleep now appears to be an almost universal feature of animal life 
There is now an emerging consensus on the behavioural features that define sleep, and these features can be used to look for sleep in simple animals, says Ravi Allada at Northwestern University in Evanston, Illinois.
There are three main elements. First and foremost, sleep renders an animal quiet and still: muscles are not very active during sleep.
Second, sleep makes animals slower to respond. For instance, if you make a loud noise near a sleeping animal, it will react more slowly than an awake animal.
And finally, we can recognise sleep because it keeps animals from getting tired. If you keep an animal up all night, it will compensate the next day by sleeping for longer than it normally would. This is sometimes called “sleep rebound”.
Using these criteria, there is growing confidence that even relatively simple animals like fruit flies and microscopic nematode worms do in fact sleep. “There are now lots of publications on these model systems,” says Allada.
Even nematode worms do something akin to sleep (Credit: Heiti Paves/Alamy Stock Photo)
Even nematode worms like this Caenorhabditis elegans do something akin to sleep (Credit: Heiti Paves/Alamy Stock Photo)
“I believe that the behavioural features used to characterise sleep are quite reliable for identifying this behaviour in animals… and to differentiate sleep from a simple rest,” says Paul-Antoine Libourel at the Lyon Neuroscience Research Center in France.
According to Libourel, sleep now appears to be an almost universal feature of animal life. “This suggests that sleep is fundamental for the survival of species. Natural selection did not suppress it.”
In fact, natural selection did the exact opposite: it built on the concept of sleep, adding in new stages and new functions. At some point in prehistory, the most famous of all stages of sleep appeared: rapid eye movement (REM) sleep.
“If there’s a new kid on the block it’s REM sleep,” says Walker. “Non-REM sleep was the original form.”
The origins of REM sleep particularly bother researchers like Libourel.
A sleepy brown pelican (Pelecanus occidentalis) (Credit: Ivan Kuzmin/Alamy Stock Photo)
A brown pelican (Pelecanus occidentalis) about to sleep (Credit: Ivan Kuzmin/Alamy Stock Photo)
We know that humans possess REM sleep. It seems pretty clear that almost all other mammals do so too, even very “primitive” egg-laying mammals like the duck-billed platypus. This means we can be reasonably confident that it was present in some of the first mammals that walked the Earth, about 220 million years ago.
The proto-mammals began spending the hours of daylight asleep below ground in dark burrows 
As it happens, dinosaurs first appeared on Earth around this time too. Many of them disappeared about 65 million years ago, but one group of dinosaurs lives on: we call them birds. And birds, like mammals, have REM sleep.
Perhaps REM sleep emerged in some distant common ancestor of mammals and the bird-dinosaurs, says Libourel, or perhaps it originated independently in the two groups. But either way, why did REM sleep appear?
Some researchers think there is no functional explanation, and that REM sleep is just a byproduct of other evolutionary changes. For instance, according to Ruben Rial at the University of the Balearic Islands in Majorca, Spain, it is probably significant that both mammals and birds are warm-blooded.
Rial and his colleagues suggest that the appearance of warm-blooded animals triggered a complicated chain of causes and consequences, which ultimately saw proto-mammals adopt a nocturnal existence – quite unlike their daytime-active reptilian ancestors.
The proto-mammals began spending the hours of daylight asleep below ground in dark burrows, which offered protection both from predators and from intense sunlight that would damage their sensitive night-adapted vision.
Our brains are remarkably active during REM sleep 
“However, they conserved most of the neural mechanisms that controlled their ancient behavioural output,” says Rial.
Reptiles go through two main behavioural phases each day: a passive phase in which they lie still and bask to warm up their bodies, and an active phase in which they forage, protect themselves from predators, socialise or breed.
Rial says that some of the more “primitive” regions of the proto-mammals’ brains continued to follow these ancient patterns of activity, even as more “advanced” brain regions made sure that any reptilian-like mental activity was not converted into actual behaviours.
This means we can see non-REM sleep as a direct descendant of reptilian basking, and REM sleep as an inherited form of reptilian daytime activity. “However, this activity was enclosed within a paralysed body,” he says. “This was the origin of REM and dreams.”
This might sound more like a story than a provable hypothesis, but some established facts do support the idea.
For instance, there is good evidence that the earliest mammals were nocturnal – and this nocturnal bottleneck did influence behaviour.
Sleep – and in particular REM sleep – helps recalibrate emotional functions in the brain 
We also know that our brains are remarkably active during REM sleep: so active, in fact, that an REM brain looks like the brain of an animal, like a reptile, that is fully awake. For this reason, REM sleep is sometimes called “active sleep” or even “paradoxical sleep”.
Even so, other researchers do not share the view that REM sleep is a mere side-effect of broader evolutionary change.
Walker, for one, is convinced that REM sleep has a real and important function. “We’ve done a lot of work that suggests sleep – and in particular REM sleep – helps recalibrate emotional functions in the brain,” he says.
Think back to your childhood, says Walker. If you try to recall the strongest earliest memories you have, almost all of them will be memories of an emotional event: perhaps a particularly exciting birthday, or the frightening experience of being separated from your parents on your first day at school.
“What’s striking now, though, is that you can recall these are memories of an emotional event but they are no longer themselves emotional. They do not elicit the same visceral reaction,” he says.
We have REM sleep to thank for the change, says Walker. It carries out a very important function: allowing us to remember and learn from important experiences, without being crippled by the emotional baggage that they originally carried.
“REM sleep provides overnight therapy,” says Walker. “[It helps] the brain perform an elegant trick of divorcing the emotional bitter rind from the information-rich orange.”
This hypothesis even offers an explanation for distressing conditions like post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
People with PTSD often experience emotionally overwhelming flashbacks.
“A soldier with PTSD walks into a carpark and hears a car backfire. Not only do they have a flashback to a combat situation, but they have an emotional reaction: their heart races, their palms sweat,” says Walker. “It tells us that the brain has not separated the emotion from the memory.”
It was the people who had experienced the longest, most miserable dreams that gained clinical resolution from their depression 
Walker points out that repetitive nightmares are a hallmark of PTSD. He says we can interpret this as the brain offering up a highly emotional memory so that REM sleep can peel away the emotion.
But, for some reason, REM fails to do so. The memory remains emotional. So the next night the brain tries again, with the same result, and so on.
Even the vivid dreams we experience during REM sleep appear to be adaptive, and part of this process. We know as much from the seminal work of Chicago-based sleep researcher Rosalind Cartwright in the 1980s and 1990s.
Cartwright studied the dream habits of people who were showing signs of depression, as a consequence of bitter divorces.
After a year, it was the people who had experienced the longest, most miserable dreams that gained clinical resolution from their depression. Paradoxically, the test subjects whose dreams were more like those of people without depression remained depressed.
It was a staggering finding, says Walker.
We spend about 25% of our sleep in an REM state, whereas for most other primates the figure is just 5-10% 
Previously it had seemed plausible that dreams were just a curious side-effect of sleep: rather like the way an incandescent lightbulb gives out heat as a consequence of its primary light-giving function. “But if that were really true, Rosalind Cartwright’s results would make no sense whatsoever,” says Walker.
Taken together, these findings suggest to Walker that REM sleep evolved in birds and mammals because both groups are cognitively and socially advanced. They use sleep, and dreams, to help make sense of their waking world. “I think the warm-blooded connection is a little bit of a red herring,” he says.
This could explain why human sleep is so unusual. A study published at the end of 2015 found that we spend about 25% of our sleep in an REM state, whereas for most other primates the figure is just 5-10%. This makes sense if you consider how much more complicated our social interactions are, says Walker.
We may be closing in on understanding why mammals and birds evolved REM sleep. But what about non-REM sleep, which evolved first and is seen in many more animals?
Sleep must have originated for a reason. Whatever that reason is, it must be related to some biological feature, or features, shared by all animals that sleep: not just mammals and birds.
Over time, a sea of neurotransmitter molecules can build up in the synapse 
Robert Cantor at Dartmouth College in Hanover, New Hampshire thinks he has identified that common feature: a relatively complex brain and nervous system. Specifically, a complex brain through which signals are transmitted by molecules called neurotransmitters.
There are small junctions called synapses between nerve cells. When one cell has a message to pass to its neighbour, it often sends it in chemical form as a swarm of neurotransmitter molecules, which latch onto receptors on the receiving cell.
“This molecular process is common to all organisms that sleep,” says Cantor. “It exists in the vast majority of synapses in nervous systems, regardless of complexity.”
But, says Cantor, this process comes with a catch.
Synapses link neurons together (Credit: The Science Picture Company/Alamy Stock Photo)
Synapses are the links between neurons (Credit: The Science Picture Company/Alamy Stock Photo)
Over time, a sea of neurotransmitter molecules can build up in the synapse, interfering with its ability to function properly. What is needed is a process to flush away those molecules. That process happens most efficiently when we sleep, he says.
Cantor had been toying with this idea for some time when, in 2012, it received a significant boost. Neuroscientists discovered a previously unrecognised network of vessels in the brain that flush out the fluids between brain cells: the “glymphatic system”. A year later it emerged that the glymphatic system is most active during sleep.
Evolution has a tendency to repurpose things 
“I’ve read quite a bit about the glymphatic system over the past few years,” says Cantor. “What has struck me as rather surprising is that, to my knowledge, nobody has systematically analysed exactly what solutes are present in the fluid that is washed out.”
He suspects that neurotransmitters are particularly abundant in the fluid. If that is true, it offers an explanation for the origin of sleep: flushing out neurotransmitters is so important to the nervous system that, in order to get it done, animals began to sleep – despite the disadvantages that come with losing consciousness.
Sleep almost certainly does play a part in this sort of brain-cleaning activity, says Walker. But we cannot be sure that this was the single factor that triggered the origin of sleep.
The trouble is that sleep might have evolved first, and then the brain and nervous system harnessed the opportunity it provides to flush out unwanted molecules from the brain.
Sleep impacts every major system in the body 
This is a common problem that evolutionary biologists face when trying to work out why particular features first evolved: evolution has a tendency to repurpose things.
For instance, breathing is very important for bringing in oxygen and removing carbon dioxide, but it is also now crucial for human speech and singing. “Nobody would affirm that the respiratory system originally served to allow the production of words,” says Rial.
Pinpointing the driving factor, or factors, that led to the origination of sleep is going to be a challenge because sleep has so many beneficial effects.
Sleep impacts every major system in the body. Cut down on sleep and it is not just your brain that struggles: the reproductive, metabolic, cardiovascular, thermoregulatory and immune systems all suffer too, says Walker. In principle, the evolution of sleep could have been driven by the benefits it brings to any one of these systems.
Sleep is a state we enter to fix the systems that are put under stress when we are awake 
“We used to ask the question; ‘Does sleep do any good, or serve any function?’” says Walker. “Now we’ve been forced to upend the question and ask if there is anything that isn’t improved by sleep, or impaired by sleep deprivation. And currently the answer is ‘no’.”
Fortunately, Earth is still home to living representatives of some of the earliest groups of animals: things like jellyfish, which may show a primitive form of sleep. It is probably by studying these more "primitive" animals that we will figure out what originally drove the appearance of sleep, says Allada.
Even single-celled organisms, at least those that live for longer than 24 hours, might hold clues. “They show stages of what we would call passive and active cellular activity,” says Walker. “That could be seen as a precursor of sleep.”
Walker offers one final thought. “This is an idea that has been put out there by some other researchers, but: we may be asking entirely the wrong question.”
What about this hypothesis: sleep was the first state of life and it was from sleep that wakefulness emerged 
All the explanations for sleep we have looked at ultimately boil down to the same thing: sleep is a state we enter to fix the systems that are put under stress when we are awake. The debate has been over which system is the crucial one.
But you could turn this argument on its head, and say that sleep is so beneficial that the question is really why animals ever bother to wake up. Maybe it is actually the harmful state of wakefulness that is an evolutionary mystery, not sleep.
“What about this hypothesis: sleep was the first state of life and it was from sleep that wakefulness emerged,” says Walker. “I think it’s probably a ridiculous hypothesis – but it’s also not entirely unreasonable.”
Please watch your inbox for important information about your employment status tomorrow.
Better tell Violet
